# cse101-computer-history
Cse 101 : computer history - computer graphics, music and art

Introduction

  The history of Computer Arts is a fascinating one, going back all the way to the 1950’s with the first computer art show. Computer Arts itself is defined as any form of graphic art, including photography, digital art, music, animation and more. Anything that could be considered an art, created on a computer, is considered a form of computer art. As a matter of fact, 2D and 3D art are both considered a part of digital art, and have their own histories. One thing that seems to be common with humanity has been the need to create art, and this is certainly no exception. From the development of specialized programs to various devices such as synthesizers, drawing tablets, and pens, computer arts have always been a part of technological development.

Time Period

  The first record computer aided art gallery was held in 1969, during a London art exhibit. However, people had began using computers for creative practices as early as 1950. The 1950's was a time of prosperity, as it was post World War II. The economy and general well-being of the world enabled people to spend more time on creative development. Technology advancement was no longer a competitive market, but instead a more co-operative one, especially as technology became more afforadble and wide-spread. While it was not in every home, many still had acces through schools or public areas. This was also a time of civil rights, and people were looking for new ways to express their ideals and desires, and computers were a way for them to express that. 
  As time went on, so did the availability of computers to the public. As internet became mainstream, people not only could create, but also share their creations online with other like minded users, gaining recognition around the world. Soon it became available to even those in poor income households, and programs as simple as MS Paint and more complex programs such as photoshop were found in nearly every other household. In this new digital era that we currently are in, technology is the most used version of creative expression, from creative film on the phone to digital art on tablets and computers. Online media became extremely popular in the early 2000's, with it only getting bigger to this day. With more self-expression available for others to see online,people could see others who had similiar interests. People could make careers off of computer art, such as Lois Van Baarle, a digital aself-employeed artist who has over 2 million followers on most social medias, three books, and many contracts with bigger companies, all of which was possible through computer art. 

Software

  The phrase Digital Art was first coined in the 80’s, with the creation of AARON, which was an actual robot that could create pieces of art. However, digital art programs existed back in the 70’s, although for more official use such as the creation of vector images. Throughout the 80’s and 90’s, 2D art was prevalent, and the use of Paint began. The first digital art program was called MacPaint, which allowed for complete artistic freedom. Digital art has been a dominant style for so long, though as 3D programs started popping up, so did 3D art. Many 3D programs started with being used for mapping. Originally, 3D programs were only used in professional fields, or for movies and video games. This made these programs more inaccessible until the mid to late 1990’s, and immediately, it became another type of artistic medium. Digital music has an interesting history as well. The first singing computer was not actually in 1961 like most people think, but was dated back to 1951 instead, with a Ferranti Mark 1 computer singing various songs such as Baa Baa Black Sheep. In 1957, the first digital music program was created, with the name MUSIC. In 1983, saw the birth of possibly one of the most infamous forms of digital music creation, MIDI files. This allowed for compatibility with multiple programs, and allowed the computer to work more closely with the software. In 1989, the Cubase was released, and it was the first to include a horizontal timeline of the user’s work. Once computers started allowing audio recordings. This gave way to many more possibilities. The VST took full advantage of this, allowing users to record and save audio tracks. Meanwhile, the Cubase was updated to allow plug-in instruments, saving the sounds that you play on your own instruments. Reason released in 2001, becoming one of the most successful music programs due to its inclusivity. However, Ableton Live released just a year later, becoming one of the most famous computer softwares for similar reasons.

Hardware

  The drawing tablet dates all the way back to 1957, and surprisingly, has a decent amount in common with most modern tablets, being a tablet used to recognize handwriting. However, the first tablet for art was created in 1981, referred to as the Utopia Graphics Tablet System. Drawing tablets are incredibly beneficial, creating a more accurate interface closer to actually writing, as opposed to using a mouse. Meanwhile, music has a more intensive history of computer hardware. The Atari ST is a good example of this and was a staple of its time. It helped people to create MIDIs. What is more interesting, however, is how technology adapted to fit with the earlier mentioned plug-in features later introduced in music software.

Conclusion

  With digital expression becoming so important in todays society, it is important to look back on where it orginated. The history of computer art came very far within a very short time compared to the rest of humananity. It has allowed for widespread self expression, a boom of new career paths, as well as becoming a very broad subject. Without computer related art, video games, music videos and many other mediums would never have become a thing as well. From the invention of Paint, to the creation of MIDI, computer art is prevlant in all of todays society. Many careers would not exist, much less the schooling for it. It has not only helped the many economies of the world, but also self expression, and well-being of those impacted.

